I'll ask you a little question to keep the narrative going.
Somali, you said your father was a self-made man.
Can you tell me, when he came to Uganda,
did he come to work on the railways,
or did he come for other purposes?
And then how did he create his wealth?
So he came to, it wasn't the railways.
My father came with setting up his own business idea.
So he had like a retail business,
and he would import products.
And every time, you know, my sister and I went to the shop,
he had a great big black chair, the boss's chair.
So I used to love twirling around in it.
It was very special to sit in his chair.
And he would either give my sister and I a pencil
and any of the female cousins who went, talcum powder.
And I've still got the talcum powder box he gave us.
So he would always give us a little bit of something.
And he had loads and loads of products.
And he would do like wholesale type work as well.
So he would supply other people.
And incredibly gifted man.
So he became very, very wealthy through that way.
But the good thing about my dad
was he helped other people as well.
Like he would say to my young uncle,
who I always used to call him cacu cacu,
the youngest cacu cacu I used to call him.
My youngest uncle used to say,
oh, when the girls are 20, you know,
think about finding a suitable match for them.
Don't leave it too late.
And he would always advise.
And he would always try and find matches for people.
Or he'd say, my brother's son is, you know,
getting his this age and we're looking for a girl for him.
And you know, he would always help out
because you had to marry in the community.
And it wasn't like how it is nowadays
with Facebook and social media.
So it was all connections and he was highly connected.
But very kind person.
And he also used to lend money to people.
And everything was done on trust.
So people would respect him
and he would help people set businesses up.
So he would lend money and then they would,
they would always give the money back.
You know, it was always respectfully done.
Right, so with regard, my community that I come from,
it's the Luana community,
which is like the business people really.
Mainly they did business type of work.
So all my, everybody I knew were either in business
and a lot of my cousins were in medicine
because in Sanskrit, you know,
it's a great honor to work in medicine
because you're serving humanity.
But of course, nowadays it's not seen like that.
It's more about status.
But that was the original Sanskrit thinking
about humanity and looking after,
looking after other people.
So with regard, the family, there is family in India.
So I did go back to India because mom couldn't go.
She was a bad, poorly controlled diabetic.
But I did go and see my auntie, who's her older sister,
in Gujarat because mom couldn't go.
And I went and I also went to see the house
where mom grew up and I was really shocked to see
that it was literally a grain store.
And the shopkeeper opened the house up for me
and it wasn't a house as such.
It was a downstairs and an upstairs open plan.
That's all that was there.
And it was literally a grain store now,
but they lived there.
So many brothers, sisters, her mom and dad,
and two brothers and four sisters.
So that sister, my mom's older sister,
always stayed in Gujarat.
So it was a great honor to meet her.
She's passed away.
My youngest auntie from my mother's side lived in Kenya
and I went to visit her years later.
And then subsequently she moved to London as well.
So, and there is some family still in India,
but because my mom's parents have died
and her sister has passed away,
the connection's a little bit loose.
But I'm sure if I was to go and introduce myself,
you know, people would be thrilled.
And I also went to Singra where my dad's family came from.
And I went to the farmhouse and I explained who I was
and they remembered me, not me, they remembered my dad.
And they gave me a piece of wood
because the door that had been there for hundreds of years
was actually coming away.
And I said, can I have a piece of wood from this door?
So I had that piece of wood.
My mom's town, my mom's village, Ravel,
she remembered a clock tower and that's still there.
So I was able to take photographs and show mom,
you know, and I showed photos of her older sister.
So she was thrilled.
And mom always missed India as well,
but she said when my sister and I were born,
she said she missed her parents and the village is less.
And so she said, I don't know what I'd have done
without you two.
If I hadn't have had you two,
my life wouldn't have been worth anything really.
And no, my mother never went back to India
because, you know, it's very difficult really
to go back there.
So for example, my auntie, when she lives there,
she's literally living in a,
they've got a courtyard with lots of families living there.
And basically it's one room, you know,
it's a lot of poverty there.
And even her son couldn't come to meet me
even though I'd gone thousands of miles
because he was running the shop.
And, you know, if you lose one deal in the shop,
it could be one less mouth you could feed almost, you know.
So it was just lovely to see my auntie.
And I was able to give her some money.
And, you know, she cried.
She didn't want to accept it,
but it was what my mom would have wanted as well.
And it was good for her to know that, you know,
that I'd gone, you know, it's my older auntie
that I'd gone to visit.
So I was able to show mom the photos.
And people remembered my mom and my dad.
And one of my mom's friends actually came up to me
because everybody finds out when you go to India,
everybody wants to know who is this stranger,
who is this person from England, as they say,
because they don't know much about other parts
of the country, Wales, for example.
And people just gather around.
And I found my mom's school friend.
She said, I remember I went to school with your mom
and the tree where they used to study, that's still there.
So it was just lovely to be able to say to mom,
I saw these people and take photographs and show her.
So it was nice to do that.
So then going back to the military coming around,
my mom never did the suicide threatened again.
And she gave my sister and I food.
And we, my sister and I sat together and we held hands
and everything was fine.
But the white dress she was wearing was never seen again.
So we didn't want any of those memories.
And mom, I think, realized and had a shock.
And I look back as an adult now
and I realize how depressed she was.
And she was trying to keep a house over,
you know, my dad's house really.
And she's trying to keep a roof over our heads
and how difficult it was to keep that.
And then the night the military came,
we were absolutely petrified, the three of us.
And the news was sent around because they come with guns
and they can assault people.
They can't just fire.
And there was a lot of, you know, trucks going up and down,
all sort of tree branches, you know, through the trucks,
trees hacked down and to make things look more threatening,
frightening with guns and guns being fired.
And Mrs. Manick has said to mom, the headmistress next door,
don't open the door, just stay quiet, you know,
because some families had left.
So obviously there wouldn't be an answer on the door.
So we were well advised really, but mom was so petrified.
And out of 50, 60 people, extended family,
male members, male cousins,
Suru, my brother, we rang around,
mom rang around and said,
can one of you come and stay with us the night?
Because obviously we weren't going to be able
to relax or sleep.
And not a single male person came to stay with us that night.
Nobody wanted to come.
And obviously you look back and you think,
yeah, every person would have been frightened,
but what about an uneducated widow
and her two small children and the man?
And the man being obviously always been credited
with a lot more strength.
And the man having always promised dad as well,
we look after them, we look after them.
They all said that to a dying man even,
we will be looking after the girls and mom.
So there was no problem, no worries.